## Why does our privacy really matter?
### Evan Selinger
- vast majority of people fail importance of privacy
- esnetial for respecting autonomy
- without praciy indivudials lack the ability to freely make their own decisions, thus strpping of core value in democratic soceity
- knowldge economy, but what sort of knowledge should we be acquiring and what sort of knowledge should we be producing?
-  In itself, nothing. Information technology allows us to know more about the world than ever before. But it also allows the world to know more about us. The Internet, in other words, is a window from which we can look both ways – and from which others can, too. That's why it's so crucial to understand why privacy is important. Appropriate privacy norms tell us quite a bit about how all kinds of information should be handled.
- but the harms that come from having your privacy unjustly invaded aren’t limited to the difficulties that many expect: consequential or instrumental matters. There’s also intrinsic harms and in-principle problems. Both matter tremendously, but can be difficult to appreciate until they’re spelled out clearly.
- Privacy matters in principle because it’s connected to the autonomy of decisionmaking. When we talk about information as private it exemplifies two different hallmarks: One is our ability to control the information and the other is our ability to protect the information from intrusion. Let’s focus on the control aspect. When I decide to share information with you or others on the Internet, this behavior tends to be thought of as an autonomous decision.  Part of the problem with privacy invasions is that they can undermine these decisions. For example, if you hacked into all the photos on my phone and shared them with your friends (who will be really bored), you’ve taken away my decision to select who to share the photos with and who to withhold them from. You’ve made that issue moot and in the process undermined my autonomy of decision. To clarify further, here’s an analogy. The situation is much like a paternalistic doctor deciding to give a patient a drug without asking for permission. The doctor makes a decision on behalf of another, removing that person out of the decisionmaking process. 
- You never find out about the incident and nothing bad ever happens as a result. Has a harm been committed? Yes. We can see that this person superseded part of your autonomy. They abused their power by taking you out of the decisionmaking equation. The same goes with the people on the faraway planet. They have taken power from us, and this matters because autonomy enables us to shape our own decisions and make ones that are in line with our deepest preferences and convictions. Autonomy lies at the heart of our humanity.  
- 