- The psychological profiling of a programmer is mostly the ability
to shift levels of abstraction, from low level to high level. To see
something in the small and to see something in the large. 
- Modularity
- Encapsulation
- Hierarchical Design
- 

ex: 
public class DigitalCamera extends Camera{
private int numPix;
DigitalCamera(String mk, String mdl, int n) { //constructor
super(mk, mdl);
numPix = n;
}
public int numberOfPixels() { return numPix; }
}

- Abstract Data Type (ADT). A set of data values and associated operations that are
precisely specified independent of any particular
implementation. 
- However, interfaces can have
more than one direct parent.
• Thus interfaces do not necessarily
form trees, but directed acylic
graphs (DAGs).
- public interface PTZCamera extends Camera, Actuator {
- This allows mixin of unrelated
interfaces to form more complex
ADTs
- A generic type becomes fully defined only when
instantiated as a variable.
- This allows us to define a class in terms of a set of
formal type parameters, that can be used to abstract
certain variables.

ex:
public class Couple<A, B> {
A obj1;
B obj2;
public void set(A o1, B o2) {
obj1 = o1;
obj2 = o2;
}
}

Camera myCam1 = new DigitalCamera("Nikon","D90”,12000000);
Camera myCam2 = new AutoDigitalCamera("Olympus","E30",12000000);
Couple<Camera,Camera> stereoCamera = new Couple<Camera,Camera>();
stereoCamera.set(myCam1, myCam2);

- Example: 2n  10 is O(n)
– 2n  10 ≤ cn
– (c  2) n 10
– n 10(c  2)
– Pick c 3 and n0 10

- f n Ogn ( ) ( ( ))
- 

- Big-Oh
 f(n) is O(g(n)) if f(n) is asymptotically less than or
equal to g(n)
big-Omega
 f(n) is Ω(g(n)) if f(n) is asymptotically greater than or
equal to g(n)
big-Theta
 f(n) is Θ(g(n)) if f(n) is asymptotically equal to g(n)
- Binary recursion spawns an exponential number of
recursive calls
- If the inputs are only declining arithmetically (e.g., n-1,
n-2,…) the result will be an exponential running time.
-  In order to use binary recursion, the input must be
declining geometrically (e.g., n/2, n/4, …)
- However, recursive solutions entail a cost in time and
memory: each recursive call requires that the current
process state (variables, program counter) be pushed
onto the system stack, and popped once the recursion
unwinds
- This typically affects the running time constants, but not
the asymptotic time complexity (e.g., O(n), O(n
2) etc.)

- array based adt simple has all O(1) running time and add/remove is O(n).
- we could use extendable array insread of throwing exception
- increase array by constant or double the size.with incremental strategy increase k = [n/c] times, amoritzed time is o(n). doublin strate replaces k =[log[n]].  amoritized time is o(1)
- queue stores first in first out, with instertions are rear and removals at front.
- array based queue in circular fashion. use modula operator.
- structural operations may dominate running time so use linked list.

- position ADT models notion of place within data structure where object is stoed
- node list adt models a sequence of positions